image: 20150720-gitlab-header.jpg
image-cover: true
tags: git, gitlab
title: Private Git repo with Gitlab (II)
subtitle: Configure and start working
----
Second chapter on this series on using Gitlab as your own private git repository.

In the [previous post](http://juliangut.com/blog/gitlab-1) we talked about Gitlab and instructions were provided on installation and basic configuration. Today we're going to dig deeper in Gitlab capabilities and configuration.

Once you log in for the first time you are requested to reset root password to a new one and then you get kicked out to login again with your newly password.

First things first I'm going to configure basic levels of security on Gitlab, head to Admin area, and then click settings menu option (last one). Here we configure in first place visibility options, I've restricted visibility to Internal in every option, this is because I'm intending to use this fake installation for enterprise use, so I wan't every project to be internally visible and don't let anything slip out of the company being publicly accessible.

Secondly I'm restricting Sign-up on the platform, I'm going to be the one adding users. Appart from this Admin are has several other configurations and most over information about the system that are really interesting.

From this point on I'm going to act as a user and manage projects which is the key here.

# SSH keys

First I need my SSH public key so I can interact with git in the repository, so on Profile settings select "SSH Keys" menu option and add your public key.

I'll go "Preferences" menu option and select `Monokai` as my syntax highlighting theme :)

There are other interesting things such as your private token or the option to grant access to third party applications, I'm not covering then right now.

With all this done it is finally time to create our first project (at last) so on the dashboard click on "New project" fill project name and visibility (in my case I'm root, if you are not and have selected previous settings then you are stuck with Internal) and we have our project created.

Here we start our project by cloning the empty repository and adding our first commit

```
git clone git@gitlab-example.com:root/awesomeness.git
cd awesomeness
touch README.md
echo "# Awesomeness" > README.md
git add README.md
git commit -m "initial commit"
git push origin master
```

Now that we have code commited we can see it in the web, get into the project and select "Files" and "Commits" menu options so you can see the commit and commited files. I'm going to add some other commits and branches to fill the project in.

### Note

I'm using default root account for this tutorial, but you should of course create .
